key campus leaders, deans and faculty members and
so forth in the late 40s and early 50s? Well, Mr.
D.W. Williams was chairman of the Athletic
Council and I remember going to LSU one time with
Bones Irving. Bones had forgotten to make a
reservation for the football team and Mr.
Williams was waiting for Bones to get there and he
said, you never confirmed the reservations. But
Mr. Penberthy followed as chairman of the
Athletic Council and was very active. And was the
council an important organization for
athletics? Yes. Chris Grinman. Dr. Chris Grinman
was chairman of the Athletic Council when Bear
Bryant came. Was he already the department head in
industrial ed by then? I think he was by that time,
yes. What about the deans? Who were they? Well, let
me think a minute. The dean of agriculture was Dr.
Shepardson. Charles Shepardson later became a
member of the board of the Federal Fair Bank. He was
head of the Dairy Science
Department. Dean Kyle, back in the early days,
when I first came back. No, he'd already been gone
by then. When I was a student, Dean Kyle would be
back in Washington. And one of these, somewhere
around here, signed by Dean Kyle. Engineering, of
course, was Gilchrist, followed by Bolton,
Dean Bolton, Dean of Engineering, Gilchrist,
Dean of Engineering. Agriculture was Patterson,
R.E. Patterson. Arts and Sciences. Arts and
Sciences.
Early as a student, Dean T.D. Brooks. And later,
when Earl came in, Brother Frank Hewitt. Before
him. Before him. Wait a second. Abbott. Dr. John
Paul Abbott. Dr. Abbott. In Vet Medicine. In Vet
Medicine. was back in the early days, was Dean
about Ohio State as Dean Armstead.
Price. Slick out and was in the late 50s. Yeah, and
the one back prior to him was Armstead and Bouton.
Dean Bouton was an Ohio State graduate, a good man,
salty, tough.
And prior
to somebody there was Dean Marshdown. As far as you
were aware, if there was a tug of war between the
deans, who had the most influence? Which of the
schools? Well, there was a tug of war between
agriculture and all the rest of it. The Department
of Agriculture always felt like they were
mistreated. And they were working. And they were.
it worked to try to get their share of everything.
Now did the others feel that agriculture was
getting more than its share? I suspect so. I
suspect so, though I never heard anyone just come
out and say so. But, well, Vincent, of course, was
an engineer.
You know, some of the schools I think really were
mistreated, like the school of veterinary
medicine. I think they were terribly mistreated.
I think Dean Hubert made a wonderful dean, Dean
Franklin. Before we get to him, let's move up and
bring this man Rudder here. Okay. Did you know who
Rudder was? Absolutely. Okay. Earl Rutter was
living in Brady. He owned a drug store with his
brother. He was working as a vice president of an
aviation company in Brady that were
manufacturing wings as a subcontractor for some
aircraft factory. I can't tell you who it was, what
airplane it was. My father had contracted to sell
some land up in Hunt County under the Texas
Veterans Land Program, Baskin-Gines.
And that contract had been going for six months or
eight months and never put here anything. Earl
Rudder had been on our executive board of our
association. Earl Rudder had been on our council.
And Earl Rutter talked to me many hours about A&M
and the relationship at the time between the
so-called system officers
and the university officers. And that there was a
serious conflict. And Earl was just as pure in
heart as any person you could ever find. He served
as mayor, didn't he? He served as mayor of Brady for
six or eight years. He was also Lyndon Johnson's
campaign manager in West Texas, where Colt
Stevenson had been for years and years and years.
But Burrell served as Lyndon's campaign manager,
did a real good job for him. When Bascom Giles was
convicted or was indicted or whatever,
Earl Rudder went to Austin to see Alan Shivers.
There was a man from Brady that Earl wanted to
recommend to the governor to be appointed as Land
Commissioner for the state of Texas. And Earl went
into Governor Shivers office and made his speech.
And Alan Shivers listened to the speech. And when
it was over, Alan says, I'm not going to appoint
your man to this position. I'm going to appoint
you. And did so. And I had known Earl very well up to
that point. And the first day at his office, I
called Earl and said, can I come see you? He said,
sure, come on down. And I drove down there to talk to
him about my father's business, his farms that
he'd contract to sell. But anyway, I visited him.
He got it all straightened out pretty quick. I
don't remember what years he served as Land
Commissioner, but I know he came to end. Let me say
this, my father died in 54. He died before the
launch was sold. So,
sometime I think about in 54, probably Earl went to
Austin, maybe 55. He served as land commissioner
until the fall of 57 when the board
went to Austin and talked him into coming up here as
vice president, laying him under Tom Harrington.
Now, can you identify who or whom was it, may have
been more than one, who kind of said, Rudder is the
person we want? Let me think. I
can't do that. You're also indicating by your lack
of mentioning of it that there wasn't some former
student who went to the board or there wasn't a
campaign for him that they sat down and thought,
who do we want? Let me say this, that in those years,
let's say 51 to 57, Earl was very active in the
association. And he was very closely associated
with people like Harold Dunn, Rufus Peoples.
People who were both very active in the
association and say on the Board of Directors, and
Polly Krueger, and Rufus Peoples, and Harold
Dunn. And so, when we got to the point where we
needed somebody to take over the administration
of this institution, we needed that. We needed
that. I think The impetus, if I had to name
somebody, would be Harold. What was not happening
here then? Instead of saying what was going wrong,
I'll say what wasn't happening. We had no
continuity of leadership. We had had president
after president after president. And we had the
presidents that we had were acting or temporary or
not here for long. And they were just people
that... did not want to run the risk of fighting the
system or changing the system or creating
problems that would be detrimental to their
well-being. And so just nothing got done. I think
primarily they wouldn't face up to the realities
of life with the court and the non-coeducation.
All right. David Morgan came as president as an
outsider. David Morgan came as a total outsider
from Colorado.
And David Morgan tried to do the best he could. But
that was at a point when I guess our enrollment was
at the lowest that has been almost in the history of
this institution. I think in 1953, Our enrollment
total was 53
students. Now, was he a capable man? Yes. That's
what I've heard from others. He was a very capable
man. His problem, nobody's listening, was his
wife. Now, I thought David Morgan was a fine fella
and he was a good administrator.
He attempted to do things, but once Tom Harrington
named him president, Tom was chancellor, Tom
would keep knocking him down and interfering and
not letting him go on his own to do things. His
problem was his wife. They were living in the old
president's home. before it burned. And his wife
would go over his head and over the head of the
chancellor who was Tom Perry and go to the board
members individually and complain about what was
happening.
And you can understand what a terrible problem
that created. Now almost every board member in
that era was a former student? I think so. Okay. And
so was he terminated or did he resign? I think he was
terminated because I had no actual fact on that. So
Earl Rutter is brought here as executive vice
president or? Vice president or executive vice
president, I'm not sure of the title. As far as you
know, was it pretty clearly understood that he was
going to become the president? Yes. It was him, he
and I talked about that group. And he said, I came to
be president, they wouldn't give me the title. And
he said, I am vice president. But he was placed in
the office of Dave Martins and the co-governor.
And he,
I'm talking about early on. He would talk to me and
said, well, they just don't do anything. In the
meantime, while he was vice president, the bunch
up at the chancellor's office were trying to pull
everything away from me and him. He was in the
chancellor's position. Sounds very familiar.
And here was Tom Harrington. Here was E.L. Angel,
Lionel Angel. Here was Henderson Shuffler. Here
was Clyde Freeman. Here was John Calhoun. Just
trying to pull it all away. Extension service and
the whole thing. Just grabbing, grabbing,
grabbing. All right. And you say that you chatted
with Mr. Rutter a lot. Yeah. Did he ever give you any
feeling that he worried about whether or not he
could relate to the academics? Yes. The academic
people. Yes, he did. He worried that he would not be
accepted by the academic life on the campus. And he
talked to me about that. And I said, Earl, if you'll
be honest and forthright and try not to be
something that you're not, use your main
strengths and don't worry about your weaknesses,
if they're weaknesses. I said, you're a good
administrator.
You know how to operate in legislative circles.
You know how to operate with the big people of
Texas. And I said, you do that. You do that. Because
he was an old acquaintance of Johnson and Connolly
and key legislators. Yes. Yes. And at that time,
the University of Texas had very weak people,
like Branson. And they did not know very well in
Austin how to deal with the legislature. You'd
know they were sitting right there with them. But
Earl did. And they depended on Earl to help them
with certain legislative problems. And Earl was
very good at that. But Earl constantly worried
about the fact that he had no advanced degrees.
That he was not an educator. He wasn't a glib
speaker. He was not a good speaker at all. And he
knew that. And he knew that. He had no timetable.
He'd get up to make speech and if somebody wouldn't
tug on him or be in the back of the room and say this,
he would talk for an hour and a half. And so he was not
the speaker that, well, Dave Market, Tom
Harrington, certainly Jack Wood, all
outstanding speakers, Earl just didn't have that
aspect of him. Where did the idea for what would
later be called the Century Study, where did that
originate? Let me explain to you. A lot of people
are claiming credit You'll find this in your
studies, or co-education, auction on post. A lot
of people claim it's crazy. Let me tell you exactly
the honest truth of what happened. In the early
60s, our board, I'm talking about the association
board, said we want to do a long-range study of
where this association's going and where it needs
to be in 25 or 30 years. So our board and our officers
appointed what we call the Long Range Committee.
And they met and they did a hell of a job. We talked to
them. We developed the Distinguished
Achievement Award Faculty Distinguished
Achievement Awards was right there. That was
developed in that study. Distinguished Alumni
Awards developed right there in that study. The
convocations, the computer, conversion to
computer records, and the more we talked, the more
we realized, We can't finish this job until we know
where the university itself is going. Because our
number one function is to help that university get
where it wants to go. And right now, they don't know
where they want to go. Nobody has put the light out
there for them to guide them. So we did our study.
And Mr. Harold Dunn, Tyree Bell, said, we have to
have a meeting with the Board of Regents and the
Board of Directors of Maine. We want Earl Rudder to
be there. Well, Earl Rudder didn't want
any of this stuff. He wasn't ready for that, was he?
So I said, okay, what do you want us to do? Jimmy
Astin was President of the Association, one of the
strongest guys I ever met.
I said, let's, and he said, we're going to have a
meeting. This was Jimmy Astin. He said, we're
going to have a meeting of the Board of Regents of
A&M. We're going to meet in the Carousel Club. in
the Sheridan Hotel in Dallas.
And we were going to line it up. So we lined up a date
and an evening. The Republic National Bank
handled the cost of the meeting. And I remember
Tyree and Harold Dunn and Jimmy Astin were our
three representatives.
Of course, I was there. Pearl was there. And those
three men laid out the probe. And they said, we
cannot finish our study until A&M has its own
study. We want you to tell us where you want to go and
what you want to do, what you want to accomplish. By
1976, our 100th birthday.
We talked about it. Earl didn't say much. But the
board talked about it. They said, we think you're
right. We think it ought to be done. And we'll get
started. And we put up, I believe it was $75,000. It
might have been $50,000 or $75,000 to finance
this. A lot of money then. A lot of money. I attended
another meeting. They agreed to do it. I attended
another meeting with some of the members of the
board up in the old boardroom, which was in Duncan
Hall, upstairs there. And when we started talking
about how we were going to set it up, who were going
to be appointed, and so forth, we said, well, since
we decided to call it the century stuff, and we
decided to name about 100 because it was the
century and because we were looking to be 100th
birthday of the institution. 100 outstanding
Texans. And we agreed not to confine it to any
people. So we did, I don't remember what the
breakup was, but it was somewhere around 50-50 or
maybe 60-40, something like that. We had a lot of
outstanding Texans, like Adam Shivers, and
others on it that were not in and graduates from
Houston, Texas. And it was this study, and this
study alone, that prompted the appointment of the
Aspirations Committee, which you hear Ray Bowen
quoting from from time to time. It was not the
Committee of Aspirations. It was a century report
that prompted The Corps being named voluntary so
that you could take your pick, go in the Corps or not
go in the Corps. And name change.
What about racial integration? Racial
integration. And this other thing was seeking out
outstanding faculty people.
Were there any particularly strong advocates of
these, of this idea of a century study? You
mentioned Dunn and Aston and Tyree Bell and Polly
Krueger and Louis Bloodworth were all very,
George Morgan, Beaumont, our association was
really strong for them. I mean to a man, they all
wanted him. Now, there were some that were not
happy with the outcome of it, but you know, we
talked about that, Charlie Babcock, some of the
other clubs, and the
Smith, Mr. Travis Smith, But by and large, the
association was strong for it. Earl was not real
happy with it. I'll tell you what I think why he
wasn't. When Earl came here, there was a lot to be
done. And in fairness to Earl, he had his boat
loaded.
But he did need guidance. And of course, I guess
he'd get guidance from everybody Whether he
wanted it or not. Whether he wanted it or not. But
Earl realized that some of the stud horses
were on this other side and were talking
co-education, were talking optional code, and
were breaking some of these traditions that were
hurting us. And once he saw that the real big boys
were just insisting on it, he decided to go with it.
But still, even during all the studies, he held
back on name change. He didn't want the name
change. He was afraid that the change of the name
would cause A&M to lose some of its standing,
whatever standing it had. All right, one day on
that one, one day in 1970, about a month before he
got sick, I was in his office and he knew that I had
been the secretary who had drafted the
aspirations report. He said, if you guys had
recommended the name LSU has, it would have
passed. And I said, what? And he said, the name over
there is the Louisiana State University and
Agricultural and Mechanical College. And he
said, us old guys didn't want to lose the A&M. Yeah,
yeah, yeah. Were there a number of others who felt
that way? Not particularly. Oh, okay. Not
particularly. Who was it? Somebody told me that,
who came up with that name? I don't know what it was.
Maggie McGee was big in those days. Yes, yes.
Maggie McGee is more responsible for anybody else
for this whole thing. higher education in Texas
been? Do you remember when we used to go around the
state in his airplane and make speeches? So Maggie
was very involved in this century study. Somebody
suggested at a meeting one time, not an A&M
graduate, just name it Texas A&M University and be
done with it. And that's what happened. All right,
so there was a former student leadership
recommended that there be a study of what A&M ought
to be on its centennial. It was then called the
Century Study. Then there were different parts of
it. I ended up being on the Aspirations Committee.
We were surprised when we voted as a committee on
those special points that the vote was unanimous
on every point. We thought, each of us thought we
were the only one. We were not aware that the former
student's leadership had a number of people who
agreed. So that if somebody ever interviewed me
about what was former student pressure on us,
there was none. Okay, I've heard that the board of
directors then as they were getting ready to
consider, that they were hoping that the
association leadership would endorse it. Share
that with me. All right. I had left by then. That was
in 64. Okay. And I left in the fall of 64, early in the
fall of 64. And John Lindsay was president of the
association. Buck Weiss had been named to take my
place. And
Earl had asked John if the association would pass a
resolution in support of this committee, namely
in support of everything that was done, including
co-education and optional court. So they drafted
the resolution, passed it, and adjourned the
meeting. I've heard that that was the last item.
Excuse me, I want to try to hear something. Sure.
I'll be sure to answer that phone.
All right. On the century study and so forth, the
board of directors then, were you all aware of what
their feelings were? Were they positive or
negative about these changes or did you know? I
don't think I knew. I don't think I knew. I know that
when the thing was over and they were attempting to
get the thing written and I know several drafts
were prepared and I don't think there was a lot of
approval of that draft and I think that's probably
when you came into the picture. By that time, my
main contact with the work of the Century Council
was through
Earl and through Wayne Hall and Dorsey. And
we brought this guy, or they brought this guy,
Bob Hunt, who was a farce.
He was kind of the supposed executive director or
something. He was the executive director of the
century.